---
layout: post
title:  "Reading: 1984"
date:   2015-01-29 09:14:28 +0530
categories: ["books"]
---
**by - George Orwell**

First of all, why did I choose to read this book? 1984 has been a book in waiting, reading its references in so many places, listening about it from so many people, and yes one of the foremost, mesmerized by Orwell after reading the Animal Farm. 1984 was surely a book in line. Following the same lines as why I chose to read this book, I had a rough picture in my mind as to what the book is going to offer. Yes, the basic picture of the book is a presentation of a dystopian world which is held in extreme moral and political cataclysm.

Presumably, the book was supposed to offer me a corrosive remark on Stalinist atrocity, on the phoney anti-fascism of the socialist regime. I agree, not just in presumptions, that the book was able to satisfy me on these grounds. Only that we underestimate a piece of literature on the basis of the underlying theme that it carries. A book sustains a whole new world of thought and experiences not just limited to the theme. For instance, 1984 just doesn’t give you a picture of the brainwash of the bourgeois and oppression of the working class, it provides us a flick of how in human mind space the thought of revolt is originated and nurtured, what people and not just the government stand for, how our past is the greatest of all teachers, and how human psyche behaves to foreign instructions and variations. The compartmentalization of mind into accepting two contradicting beliefs is an intense proclamation of the question of what actually truth is. Quid est veritas?

Orwell’s writing style had a great impression on me in particular. Every author comes with her/his unique charm and manner of word play but some styles resonate with the reader. To me, it happened with the two books I have read by Orwell. Although the word play did not demand a second look on the lines, some heighten words which were used looked very quintessential and beautifully embraced the composition. Orwell’s artistic creations, which includes the NewSpeak vocabulary, names of the three regions, the four ministries and a vivid justification of how categorical word use carries an imposing effect on the human faculties made a revealing lettering on my literary knowledge. I was intrigued by some of the lines Orwell made to convey a thought, “sanity is not/is statistical”, “present is the fruit of the past and a seed for the future” are some of them.

Coming to the characters, the portrayal of a limited people made sense due to the annihilation of diversity by Ingsoc.  Winston represented the rebel. Julia a self-categorized renegade. O’Brien and Mr. Charrington depicted the Inner party and the Thought Police (Thinkpol!) respectively. Winston Smith the conceited outer party member and the fat old woman was presented on behalf of the proletarians.

The story, a telegraphic tell-tale, although revolved around Winston and his determined thoughts, did not made me bind with the central character. I was always able to maintain a third person frame and not embody the protagonist (as happens with many books). I enjoyed this first-time experience of completely going detached with the characters throughout.

To me the story had 4 sections, although not very distinguishable. The first, where Winston gathers the guts and shakes hands with his doom by starting with his diary, his initial perceptions about Julia and O’Brien, here in this moment Orwell also sketches the initial outline about the principles of Ingsoc and the different fragments of the society. The second section depicts his encounter with Julia, the resonance of his thoughts with her although with some parallelism. Bits of his remorse with his marriage and nostalgia about his family. Winston coming in contact with O’Brien, his handling of “the book”. The second section becomes the poignant one on this particular note of Winston reading this book by Goldstein, here I was not reading the text with relevance to the story but as a scholarly text. Orwell’s theories on war and the stratification of society coming through Goldstein really enriched my experience with the book. The third section when Winston was acquired into the Ministry of Love and his intellectual rejuvenation through the hands of O’Brien deepens the construct as to how intensely Orwell wanted the book to end on a dystopian note. Here, my predicted end was Winston (the idea of revolt) getting annihilated with all the confessions and drudgeries but with the belief intact. The way Orwell shaped the end clearly shows how much he himself believed in a similar future while he was writing it. The fourth section was something that did not make much difference to the story, Winston-Julia meeting again, Winston proclaiming his love for Big Brother, were all segments that didn’t characterize the plot much and just hampered the story to a formal end.

Another interesting thing to take away from 1984 is that Orwell really wrote it imagining a future of this kind around the 1980’s. In the present era, apart from a few exceptions in some parts of Asia most of the countries are oriented towards capitalism. The wings of the left thought frame appear sliced with a bleak possibility of its rejuvenation. So the question is, are we over with this dystopian possibility or what Orwell proposed is only postponed for a few decades?
